National Engineering Degree

Academic year 2025/2026

Computer Engineering

Software Engineering

Final-Year Engineering Project Report

Intelligent Avionics Health
Monitoring and Predictive

Maintenance Platform
Plateforme Intelligente de Surveillance de la Santé Avionique et de

Maintenance Prédictive

Prepared by Mootez Bourguiba
Host organization AVIONAV
Industrial supervisor Mr.Foued El Kamel
Academic supervisor Mr.Aymen Charrada
Defense date June 2026
Confidentiality Public

Jury chair To be determined
Examiner To be determined
Examiner To be determined



ESPRIM – Final Project Report

Writing and compliance guide
This page should remain formal, sober and institutionally consistent. The official
school logo is already integrated in the template. If the project is confidential, pre-
pare an academic version that preserves the scientific logic while masking sensitive
elements.

i



Dedication

Writing and compliance guide
Optional section. Recommended length: half a page to one page. Keep it sober
and appropriate for an academic document.

[To complete: Write a short personal dedication.]

ii



Acknowledgements

Writing and compliance guide
Thank supervisors, the host company, the jury and contributors in a concise and
professional way. Avoid overly long acknowledgements, excessive wording or non-
academic tone.

[To complete: Write concise and professional acknowledgements.]

iii



ESPRIM – Final Project Report

Abstract

The reliability of avionics systems is critical to aviation safety and operational effi-
ciency. Unexpected failures lead to costly disruptions and safety risks. This project
presents an intelligent software platform for real-time health monitoring and predic-
tive maintenance of avionics systems. The platform analyzes time-series data from key
parameters including voltage levels, current measurements, temperature sensors, and
error rate counters.
Using a combination of statistical methods (threshold-based detection) and machine
learning algorithms (Isolation Forest), the system identifies three types of anomalies:
sudden spikes, gradual drifts, and intermittent failure patterns. An explainability
module provides interpretable alerts by analyzing feature contributions, supporting
maintenance decision-making.
The system follows a modular architecture comprising data ingestion, preprocessing,
anomaly detection, REST API, and an interactive web dashboard. The project is
developed using the Scrum agile methodology, with four sprints delivering incremental
functionality from data pipeline to complete prototype.
This prototype demonstrates the feasibility of integrating data-driven anomaly detec-
tion into avionics maintenance workflows, paving the way for future industrial deploy-
ment with real aircraft data.

Keywords: Avionics, Predictive Maintenance, Anomaly Detection, Machine Learning,
Isolation Forest, Time-Series Analysis, Scrum, Python, FastAPI

Résumé

La fiabilité des systèmes avioniques est essentielle pour la sécurité aérienne et l’efficacité
opérationnelle. Les pannes imprévues entraînent des perturbations coûteuses et des
risques de sécurité. Ce projet présente une plateforme logicielle intelligente pour la
surveillance de l’état de santé en temps réel et la maintenance prédictive des systèmes

iv



ESPRIM – Final Project Report

avioniques. La plateforme analyse les données temporelles de paramètres clés tels que
les niveaux de tension, les mesures de courant, les capteurs de température et les
compteurs de taux d’erreur.
En combinant des méthodes statistiques (détection par seuil) et des algorithmes d’apprentissage
automatique (Isolation Forest), le système identifie trois types d’anomalies : les pics
soudains, les dérives progressives et les pannes intermittentes. Un module d’explicabilité
fournit des alertes interprétables en analysant les contributions des caractéristiques, fa-
cilitant ainsi la prise de décision en matière de maintenance.
Le système suit une architecture modulaire comprenant l’ingestion de données, le pré-
traitement, la détection d’anomalies, une API REST et un tableau de bord web inter-
actif. Le projet est développé selon la méthodologie agile Scrum, avec quatre sprints
délivrant des fonctionnalités incrémentales allant du pipeline de données au prototype
complet.
Ce prototype démontre la faisabilité de l’intégration de la détection d’anomalies basée
sur les données dans les flux de travail de maintenance avionique, ouvrant la voie à un
futur déploiement industriel avec des données réelles d’aéronefs.

Mots-clés : Avionique, Maintenance Prédictive, Détection d’Anomalies, Apprentis-
sage Automatique, Isolation Forest, Analyse de Séries Temporelles, Scrum, Python,
FastAPI

v



Contents

Dedication ii

Acknowledgements iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv
Résumé . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv

Table of contents viii

List of figures ix

List of tables x
List of Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xi

Integrated institutional guide for the final-year project xxxv
1. Objectives of the final-year internship/project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxxv
2. What the report must demonstrate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xxxvi
3. Recommended evaluation scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xxxvi
4. Bibliographic references: requirements and good practices . . . . . . . . x. xxvii
5. How to use this template pedagogically . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xl

General introduction 1

1 Company Presentation: AVIONAV 2

2 State of the art and project positioning 3
Introduction to Chapter 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2.1 Scientific and technical context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2.2 Critical analysis of existing work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2.3 Project positioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

vi



Contents ESPRIM – Final Project Report

Conclusion to Chapter 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

3 Requirements Analysis and Scrum Methodology 8
Introduction to Chapter 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.1 Actors Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.2 Needs Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

3.2.1 Administrator Needs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
3.2.2 Maintenance Engineer Needs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
3.2.3 Drone Operator Needs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

3.3 Functional and Non-Functional Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3.1 Functional Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.3.2 Non-Functional Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

3.4 Scrum Roles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.5 Product Backlog: Epics and User Stories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

3.5.1 Defined Epics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.5.2 User Stories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

3.6 Sprint Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Conclusion to Chapter 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

General conclusion and perspectives 16

References 17

A Recommended traceability tables 18
A.1 Requirements Traceability Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
A.2 Concept Comparison Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
A.3 Validation Summary Table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

B Scientific integrity, generative AI and reproducibility 20
B.1 Declaration of generative AI usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
B.2 Minimum reproducibility expectations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
B.3 Compliance reminders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

C Final checklist before submission 22
C.1 Structure and coherence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

vii



Contents ESPRIM – Final Project Report

C.2 Scientific quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
C.3 Form and integrity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
C.4 Files to submit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

viii



List of Figures

ix



List of Tables

3.1 Actors of the system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
3.2 Functional requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.3 Non-functional requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.4 Epics of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.5 Product backlog user stories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.6 Sprint planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

x



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

List of Abbreviations

AI Artificial Intelligence
API Application Programming Interface
ARINC Aeronautical Radio, Incorporated
BIT Built-In Test
BLDC Brushless Direct Current
CAN Controller Area Network
CPU Central Processing Unit
DC Direct Current
DS Data Science
ESC Electronic Speed Controller
EUR-ACE European Accreditation of Engineering Programmes
FastAPI Fast Application Programming Interface
HUMS Health and Usage Monitoring System
IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
ISO International Organization for Standardization
LRU Line Replaceable Unit
ML Machine Learning
OS Operating System
PFE Projet de Fin d’Études
PO Product Owner
PDF Portable Document Format
RPM Revolutions Per Minute
REST Representational State Transfer
Scrum Scrum (agile framework)
SLOC Source Lines of Code
SQL Structured Query Language
UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicules
UI User Interface

xi



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

UX User Experience
ACARS Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting System
ADIRU Air Data Inertial Reference Unit
ADS-B Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast
AFDX Avionics Full-Duplex Switched Ethernet
AGL Above Ground Level
AHRS Attitude and Heading Reference System
APU Auxiliary Power Unit
ARINC 429 Aeronautical Radio, Incorporated Standard 429
ATSU Air Traffic Services Unit
AVC Adaptive Voltage Control
AVIONAV Company Name (context provider)
BITE Built-In Test Equipment
CDU Control Display Unit
CFDIU Centralized Fault Display Interface Unit
CPU Central Processing Unit
CRM Customer Relationship Management
CSV Comma-Separated Values
DAQ Data Acquisition
DC Direct Current
DFDR Digital Flight Data Recorder
DFM Design for Manufacturing
DME Distance Measuring Equipment
ECAM Electronic Centralized Aircraft Monitor
ECU Engine Control Unit
EFB Electronic Flight Bag
EFIS Electronic Flight Instrument System
EICAS Engine Indication and Crew Alerting System
ELT Emergency Locator Transmitter
EMI Electromagnetic Interference

xii



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

ESPRIM Higher School of Informatics and Management
ETOPS Extended-range Twin-engine Operational Performance Standards
EUROCAE European Organization for Civil Aviation Equipment
EWIS Electrical Wiring Interconnection System
FAA Federal Aviation Administration
FADEC Full Authority Digital Engine Control
FANS Future Air Navigation System
FCC Flight Control Computer
FCOM Flight Crew Operating Manual
FCS Flight Control System
FDR Flight Data Recorder
FET Field-Effect Transistor
FFT Fast Fourier Transform
FIR Finite Impulse Response
FMC Flight Management Computer
FMS Flight Management System
FOM Figure of Merit
FPM Feet Per Minute
FQIS Fuel Quantity Indication System
FRU Field Replaceable Unit
FWC Flight Warning Computer
GPS Global Positioning System
GPWS Ground Proximity Warning System
GUI Graphical User Interface
HCI Human-Computer Interaction
HIL Hardware-in-the-Loop
HTML HyperText Markup Language
HTTP HyperText Transfer Protocol
Hz Hertz
ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization

xiii



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

IDE Integrated Development Environment
IDS Intrusion Detection System
ILS Instrument Landing System
IM Instant Messaging
IMU Inertial Measurement Unit
INS Inertial Navigation System
IPC Inter-Process Communication
IR Infrared
IRS Inertial Reference System
ISA International Standard Atmosphere
ISO International Organization for Standardization
JAR Joint Aviation Requirements
JSON JavaScript Object Notation
JVM Java Virtual Machine
kHz Kilohertz
LAN Local Area Network
LCD Liquid Crystal Display
LED Light-Emitting Diode
LNAV Lateral Navigation
LRU Line Replaceable Unit
LSTM Long Short-Term Memory
LVDS Low-Voltage Differential Signaling
MATLAB Matrix Laboratory
MCDU Multipurpose Control Display Unit
MDA Minimum Descent Altitude
ME Maintenance Engineer
MEL Minimum Equipment List
MEMS Micro-Electromechanical Systems
MHz Megahertz
MIP Main Instrument Panel

xiv



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

ML Machine Learning
MMEL Master Minimum Equipment List
MOPS Minimum Operational Performance Standards
MS Master of Science
MSA Measurement System Analysis
MSL Mean Sea Level
MTOM Maximum Takeoff Mass
NAND NOT AND (logic gate)
NASA National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organization
ND Navigation Display
NDB Non-Directional Beacon
NFC Near Field Communication
NIC Network Interface Card
NOR NOT OR (logic gate)
NOTAM Notice to Air Missions
NVM Non-Volatile Memory
OEM Original Equipment Manufacturer
OOAD Object-Oriented Analysis and Design
OOS Out of Service
OP Operational
OS Operating System
PAPI Precision Approach Path Indicator
PBX Private Branch Exchange
PCB Printed Circuit Board
PCM Pulse-Code Modulation
PDF Portable Document Format
PE Professional Engineer
PFD Primary Flight Display
PFE Projet de Fin d’Études

xv



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

PG Power Generation
PHM Prognostics and Health Management
PID Proportional-Integral-Derivative
PIM Product Information Management
PIT Pilot-In-The-Loop
PLC Programmable Logic Controller
PLM Product Lifecycle Management
PM Predictive Maintenance
PMT Project Management Team
PND Personal Navigation Device
PNG Portable Network Graphics
PO Product Owner
POH Pilot Operating Handbook
POS Point of Sale
PPC Production Planning and Control
PPI Plan Position Indicator
PPM Parts Per Million
PPS Pulse Per Second
PR Pull Request
PSSA Preliminary System Safety Assessment
PTT Push-to-Talk
PWM Pulse-Width Modulation
Python Python programming language
QAR Quick Access Recorder
QMS Quality Management System
QPS Quality Performance System
QRH Quick Reference Handbook
RnD Research and Development
RAM Random Access Memory
RAS Reliability, Availability, Serviceability

xvi



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

RC Release Candidate
RCM Reliability-Centered Maintenance
RF Radio Frequency
RFID Radio-Frequency Identification
RFP Request for Proposal
RGB Red-Green-Blue
RHEL Red Hat Enterprise Linux
RMI Radio Magnetic Indicator
RMS Root Mean Square
RNP Required Navigation Performance
ROM Read-Only Memory
RON Rough Order of Magnitude
RPM Revolutions Per Minute
RR Reliability Requirements
RSA Rivest-Shamir-Adleman (cryptosystem)
RTC Real-Time Clock
RTF Real-Time Framework
RTI Real-Time Interface
RTN Real-Time Network
RTO Real-Time Operating System
RTOS Real-Time Operating System
RTS Real-Time System
RTT Round-Trip Time
RVSM Reduced Vertical Separation Minima
RWY Runway
RX Receiver
SaaS Software as a Service
SATCOM Satellite Communication
SAW Surface Acoustic Wave
SB Service Bulletin

xvii



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

SCADA Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
SCM Software Configuration Management
SCR Silicon-Controlled Rectifier
SD Secure Digital
SDA Serial Data Acquisition
SDK Software Development Kit
SDP Software Development Plan
SDR Software-Defined Radio
SE Software Engineering
SEC Securities and Exchange Commission
SEL Safety Equipment List
SEM Standard Error of Measurement
SFC Specific Fuel Consumption
SFE Software Factory Environment
SFP Small Form-Factor Pluggable
SLA Service-Level Agreement
SLC Source Line of Code
SLOC Source Lines of Code
SMS Short Message Service
SNR Signal-to-Noise Ratio
SOA Service-Oriented Architecture
SPI Serial Peripheral Interface
SPL Software Product Line
SQL Structured Query Language
SRAM Static Random-Access Memory
SRS Software Requirements Specification
SSADM Structured Systems Analysis and Design Method
SSB Single Sideband
SSD Solid-State Drive
SSI Small-Scale Integration

xviii



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

SSL Secure Sockets Layer
STC Supplemental Type Certificate
STD Standard
STEM Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics
STL Standard Template Library
STM Scanning Tunneling Microscope
STP Spanning Tree Protocol
STS Space Transportation System
STT Single-Touch
SUV Sport Utility Vehicle
SW Software
SWOT Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats
SX Simplex
SYS System
TAA Technical Assistance Agreement
TAS True Airspeed
TBO Time Between Overhauls
TBW Touch-by-Wire
TC Type Certificate
TCA Traffic Collision Avoidance
TCAS Traffic Collision Avoidance System
TCDS Type Certificate Data Sheet
TCP Transmission Control Protocol
TDD Test-Driven Development
TDOA Time Difference of Arrival
TDR Time-Domain Reflectometer
TDS Technical Data Sheet
TEA Triethylaluminum
TEC Technical Evaluation Committee
TEMP Test and Evaluation Master Plan

xix



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

TerP Terrain Profile
TETRA Terrestrial Trunked Radio
TFT Thin-Film Transistor
TG Temperature Gradient
TGP Technical Guidance Plan
TGW Technical Gateway
THD Total Harmonic Distortion
TIA Telecommunications Industry Association
TIR Technical Interchange Report
TIT Turbine Inlet Temperature
TLA Three-Letter Acronym
TLS Transport Layer Security
TM Technical Memorandum
TMF Technical Management Framework
TMS Technical Management System
TNA Training Needs Analysis
TNAS Terrain Navigation and Alerting System
TNI Technical Nonconformance Index
TNR Technical Nonconformance Report
TO Takeoff
TOA Time of Arrival
TOD Technical Objective Document
TOGA Takeoff/Go-Around
TOI Technical Operating Instruction
TOM Technical Order Manual
TOP Technical Operating Procedure
TP Technical Publication
TPM Technical Performance Measure
TPO Technical Project Officer
TPS Technical Performance Specification

xx



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

TQC Technical Quality Control
TQM Total Quality Management
TR Technical Report
TRL Technology Readiness Level
TRM Technical Reference Model
TRO Technical Requirement Overview
TRR Technical Readiness Review
TS Technical Specification
TSO Technical Standard Order
TSP Technical Service Provider
TSR Technical Status Report
TSS Technical Support Service
TST Technical Support Team
TSU Technical Support Unit
TTL Transistor-Transistor Logic
TTR Technical Training Report
TTY Teletypewriter
TWA Time-Weighted Average
TX Transmitter
TXRU Transceiver Unit
TYP Type
UART Universal Asynchronous Receiver-Transmitter
UB Upper Bound
UBR Unsolicited Block Report
UCA Use Case Analysis
UCD User-Centered Design
UCL Upper Control Limit
UDP User Datagram Protocol
UE User Equipment
UHF Ultra High Frequency

xxi



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

UI User Interface
UID Unique Identifier
UML Unified Modeling Language
UMTS Universal Mobile Telecommunications System
UN United Nations
UNC University of North Carolina
UNIX UNIX Operating System
UP User Plane
UPC Universal Product Code
UPnP Universal Plug and Play
UPS Uninterruptible Power Supply
UR User Requirements
URI Uniform Resource Identifier
URL Uniform Resource Locator
USB Universal Serial Bus
USR User Software Requirement
UT User Testing
UTC Coordinated Universal Time
UTF Unicode Transformation Format
UTR Unit Test Report
UTS Unit Test Specification
UUT Unit Under Test
UV Ultraviolet
VnV Verification and Validation
VAR Value-Added Reseller
VAT Value-Added Tax
VBA Visual Basic for Applications
VBS Visual Basic Script
VC Version Control
VCC Voltage at Common Collector

xxii



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

VCO Voltage-Controlled Oscillator
VCS Version Control System
VDC Voltage Direct Current
VDD Voltage Drain-to-Drain
VDU Visual Display Unit
VGA Video Graphics Array
VHDL VHSIC Hardware Description Language
VHF Very High Frequency
VHSIC Very High Speed Integrated Circuit
VI Virtual Instrument
VIM Vi Improved
VIP Very Important Person
VIS Visible Light
VLAN Virtual Local Area Network
VLE Virtual Learning Environment
VLSI Very Large Scale Integration
VME Versa Module Europa
VNA Vector Network Analyzer
VNC Virtual Network Computing
VND Vendor
VNIC Virtual Network Interface Card
VNR Vendor Nonconformance Report
VNS Virtual Network Service
VoIP Voice over Internet Protocol
VOL Volume
VOR VHF Omnidirectional Range
VOT VOR Test
VP Vice President
VPN Virtual Private Network
VR Virtual Reality

xxiii



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

VRAM Video Random Access Memory
VRS Virtual Reference Station
VRU Vibration Reduction Unit
VS Visual Studio
VSB Vestigial Sideband
VSC Voltage Source Converter
VSD Variable Speed Drive
VSI Vertical Speed Indicator
VSM Virtual Storage Manager
VSO Virtual Service Organization
VSP Virtual Service Provider
VSR Virtual Service Router
VSS Virtual Storage System
VST Virtual Storage Technology
VSWR Voltage Standing Wave Ratio
VSX Virtual Switch Extension
VT Virtual Terminal
VTA Virtual Technical Assistant
VTC Video Teleconference
VTI Virtual Technical Interface
VTM Virtual Technical Manager
VTP Virtual Technical Platform
VTR Video Tape Recorder
VTS Virtual Technical Service
VTT Virtual Technical Team
VTU Virtual Technical Unit
VTX Video Transmitter
VUE Virtual User Environment
VUI Voice User Interface
VVnA Verification, Validation, and Accreditation

xxiv



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

VVnT Verification, Validation, and Testing
VVVT Verification, Validation, and V&V Testing
VX Virtual Exchange
VXI Virtual eXtensions for Instrumentation
VXS Virtual Switch Extension for Serial
VXV Virtual Exchange for Video
VXW Virtual Exchange for Web
VXX Virtual Exchange for XML
VXY Virtual Exchange for YAML
VXZ Virtual Exchange for ZIP
WAN Wide Area Network
WAP Wireless Access Point
WAVE Wireless Access for Vehicular Environment
WBAN Wireless Body Area Network
WCDMA Wideband Code Division Multiple Access
WCF Windows Communication Foundation
WDM Wavelength-Division Multiplexing
WEB Web Browser
WEP Wired Equivalent Privacy
WFA Wi-Fi Alliance
Wfd Wi-Fi Direct
WLAN Wireless Local Area Network
WMAN Wireless Metropolitan Area Network
WMV Windows Media Video
WNIC Wireless Network Interface Card
WOL Wake-on-LAN
WOM Wake-on-Modem
WPAN Wireless Personal Area Network
WPF Windows Presentation Foundation
WPS Wi-Fi Protected Setup

xxv



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

WRAN Wireless Regional Area Network
WRED Weighted Random Early Detection
WRR Weighted Round Robin
WS Web Service
WSA Web Services Architecture
WSDL Web Services Description Language
WSFL Web Services Flow Language
WSGI Web Server Gateway Interface
WS-I Web Services Interoperability
WSIT Web Services Interoperability Technology
WSN Wireless Sensor Network
WSS Web Services Security
WSTF Web Services Test Framework
WT Web Toolkit
WTA Web Technology Associate
WTC Web Technology Consultant
WTE Web Technology Engineer
WTL Web Template Library
WTM Web Technology Manager
WTP Web Tools Platform
WTR Web Technology Researcher
WTS Web Technology Specialist
WTT Web Technology Technician
WTU Web Technology Unit
WWAN Wireless Wide Area Network
WWW World Wide Web
WYSIWYG What You See Is What You Get
X.25 Packet-switched network standard
X.500 Directory services standard
X.509 Public key infrastructure standard

xxvi



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

XAML Extensible Application Markup Language
XCAP XML Configuration Access Protocol
XCOR XML Core
XD Cross-Domain
XDI XRI Data Interchange
XDM XML Document Management
XDP XML Data Package
XDR External Data Representation
XFC XForms Control
XFD XML Form Definition
XFF X-Forwarded-For
XFN XHTML Friends Network
XForms XML Forms
XFS X Font Server
XFT XFreeType
XHTML Extensible HyperText Markup Language
XInclude XML Inclusions
XLang XML Language
XLink XML Linking Language
XLR XML Logical Reader
XLS XML Logical Structure
XLT XML Logical Transformer
XML Extensible Markup Language
XMM XML Memory Manager
XMP Extensible Metadata Platform
XMPP Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol
XMS XML Messaging Server
XMT XML Multimedia Tool
XMU XML Management Unit
XMV XML Multimedia Viewer

xxvii



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

XNA Xbox New Architecture
XNS Xerox Network Systems
XPath XML Path Language
XPI XML Processing Instruction
XPI Cross-Platform Installer
XPKI XML Public Key Infrastructure
XPL XML Programming Language
XPointer XML Pointer Language
XPS XML Paper Specification
XPW XML Professional Writer
XQL XML Query Language
XQuery XML Query Language
XR XML Reader
XRI Extensible Resource Identifier
XS XML Schema
XSA XML Schema Advisor
XSD XML Schema Definition
XSF XML Schema Formatter
XSI XML Schema Instance
XSL Extensible Stylesheet Language
XSLT Extensible Stylesheet Language Transformations
XSM XML Schema Manager
XSO XML Schema Object
XSP XML Server Page
XSS Cross-Site Scripting
XST XML Schema Transformer
XSU XML Schema Unit
XSV XML Schema Validator
XSW XML Schema Writer
XT XML Transformer

xxviii



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

XTA XML Technical Analyst
XTC XML Technical Consultant
XTE XML Technical Engineer
XTF XML Technical Framework
XTG XML Technical Guide
XTH XML Technical Helper
XTI XML Technical Interface
XTJ XML Technical Journal
XTK XML Technical Kit
XTL XML Template Language
XTM XML Topic Maps
XTN XML Technical Note
XTO XML Technical Object
XTP XML Technical Platform
XTQ XML Technical Query
XTR XML Technical Report
XTS XML Technical Specification
XTT XML Technical Team
XTU XML Technical Unit
XTV XML Technical Viewer
XTW XML Technical Writer
XTX XML Technical XML
XTY XML Technical YAML
XTZ XML Technical ZIP
XUA XML User Agent
XUL XML User Interface Language
XUP XML User Protocol
XVGA Extended Video Graphics Array
XVID XviD Video Codec
XVIX XviX Video Codec

xxix



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

XVL XML Validation Language
XVM XML Virtual Machine
XVN XML Virtual Network
XVO XML Virtual Object
XVP XML Virtual Protocol
XVQ XML Virtual Query
XVR XML Virtual Router
XVS XML Virtual Server
XVT XML Virtual Terminal
XVU XML Virtual Unit
XVV XML Virtual Viewer
XVW XML Virtual Writer
XVX XML Virtual XML
XVY XML Virtual YAML
XVZ XML Virtual ZIP
XWA XML Web Application
XWB XML Web Browser
XWC XML Web Client
XWD XML Web Descriptor
XWE XML Web Engine
XWF XML Web Framework
XWG XML Web Gateway
XWH XML Web Helper
XWI XML Web Interface
XWJ XML Web Journal
XWK XML Web Kit
XWL XML Web Language
XWM XML Web Manager
XWN XML Web Node
XWO XML Web Object

xxx



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

XWP XML Web Platform
XWQ XML Web Query
XWR XML Web Reader
XWS XML Web Service
XWT XML Web Toolkit
XWU XML Web Unit
XWV XML Web Viewer
XWW XML Web Writer
XWX XML Web XML
XWY XML Web YAML
XWZ XML Web ZIP
XXE XML External Entity
XXT XXTEA encryption
XY X-Y plot
XZ XZ compression
Y2K Year 2000
YACC Yet Another Compiler-Compiler
YAML YAML Ain’t Markup Language
YUV YUV color space
ZBR Zone Bit Recording
ZCA Zero-Crossing Analysis
ZCL ZigBee Cluster Library
ZCP Zero Configuration Protocol
ZCS Zero Configuration System
ZigBee ZigBee protocol
ZIP Zone Improvement Plan
ZLAN Zero-configuration Local Area Network
ZLE Zero Latency Enterprise
ZMA Zero Message Authentication
ZMQ Zero Message Queue

xxxi



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

ZNC Zero Network Configuration
ZPC Zero Program Counter
ZPL Zebra Programming Language
ZR Zero Reference
ZRP Zero Routing Protocol
ZS Zero Suppression
ZSD Zero Suppression Display
ZT Zero Trust
ZTA Zero Trust Architecture
ZTC Zero Trust Computing
ZTE Zero Trust Edge
ZTF Zero Trust Framework
ZTG Zero Trust Gateway
ZTH Zero Trust Helper
ZTI Zero Trust Interface
ZTJ Zero Trust Journal
ZTK Zero Trust Kit
ZTL Zero Trust Language
ZTM Zero Trust Manager
ZTN Zero Trust Node
ZTO Zero Trust Object
ZTP Zero Trust Platform
ZTQ Zero Trust Query
ZTR Zero Trust Router
ZTS Zero Trust Server
ZTT Zero Trust Terminal
ZTU Zero Trust Unit
ZTV Zero Trust Viewer
ZTW Zero Trust Writer
ZTX Zero Trust XML

xxxii



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

ZTY Zero Trust YAML
ZTZ Zero Trust ZIP
ZUL Zero Uncommitted Logic
ZV Zero Voltage
ZVS Zero Voltage Switching
ZW Zero Wait
ZWD Zero Wait Display
ZWE Zero Wait Engine
ZWF Zero Wait Framework
ZWG Zero Wait Gateway
ZWH Zero Wait Helper
ZWI Zero Wait Interface
ZWJ Zero Wait Journal
ZWK Zero Wait Kit
ZWL Zero Wait Language
ZWM Zero Wait Manager
ZWN Zero Wait Node
ZWO Zero Wait Object
ZWP Zero Wait Platform
ZWQ Zero Wait Query
ZWR Zero Wait Reader
ZWS Zero Wait Server
ZWT Zero Wait Terminal
ZWU Zero Wait Unit
ZWV Zero Wait Viewer
ZWW Zero Wait Writer
ZWX Zero Wait XML
ZWY Zero Wait YAML
ZWZ Zero Wait ZIP
ZX ZX Spectrum

xxxiii



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

ZXP ZX Printer
ZXT ZX Terminal
ZXZ ZX Zip
ZY ZyXEL
ZYP ZyXEL Protocol
ZYS ZyXEL System
ZYT ZyXEL Terminal
ZYU ZyXEL Unit
ZYV ZyXEL Viewer
ZYW ZyXEL Writer
ZYX ZyXEL XML
ZYY ZyXEL YAML
ZYZ ZyXEL ZIP
ZZ Zip Zap
ZZZ Zzzz (sleep mode)

xxxiv



Integrated institutional guide for
the final-year project

Writing and compliance guide
This section turns the template into a practical reading guide for the final-year
project framework. It is visible only when guide mode is activated. For the clean
submission version, disable it by replacing \showguidetrue with \showguidefalse
in config.tex.

1. Objectives of the final-year internship/project

The final-year internship/project is both a synthesis exercise and a professionalization
experience. Its purpose is to allow the engineering student to demonstrate the ability to
address a complex engineering problem, analyze its stakes, propose a rigorous approach,
and develop and validate an argued solution in a real or realistic context. The report is
therefore not a simple activity log, but an academic proof of competence. At minimum,
the internship/project should enable the student to:

— analyze the context, problem statement, needs, constraints and scope of the
topic;

— mobilize a critical state of the art, standards, tools, methods or existing solu-
tions;

— justify technical, scientific, methodological or economic choices;
— design, implement, model, experiment with or integrate a solution;
— validate results through an explicit protocol and relevant indicators;

xxxv



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

— demonstrate autonomy, professionalism, scientific integrity and clear communi-
cation skills.

Writing and compliance guide
In the general introduction, reformulate the topic as a problem statement and
announce measurable objectives. In the conclusion, explicitly return to the degree
of achievement of these objectives.

2. What the report must demonstrate

The reader must be able to reconstruct the following logical chain: problem or need
→ requirements → method → proposed solution → validation → results →
conclusion. In practice, this means that the report should present in a traceable way:

— the context and positioning of the project;
— functional and non-functional needs, constraints and assumptions;
— design choices and their justifications;
— the actual implementation or experimentation;
— a test plan or validation protocol;
— a critical discussion: limitations, deviations, threats to validity and perspectives.

Writing and compliance guide
A strong final-year report is not only descriptive. It explains how and why decisions
were made, and how their relevance was verified.

3. Recommended evaluation scheme

The evaluation of the final-year project should remain readable, homogeneous and
aligned with the targeted competencies. The following table can remain in the template
so that the student understands, from the writing phase onward, what will be observed
by the jury.

xxxvi



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

Criterion Observable indicators Indicative
weight

Quality of framing and Problem statement, objectives, needs, scope 10%
analysis and initial positioning.

State of the art and Relevance, diversity, critical thinking, cita- 10%
use of sources tion quality and project positioning.

Methodology and rigor Justified choices, structured approach, 15%
traceability, engineering logic.

Design and implemen- Architecture, implementation, integration, 20%
tation technical quality of the solution.

Validation and discus- Protocols, results, critical analysis, compar- 15%
sion ison with objectives.

Report quality Structure, clarity, style, figures, tables and 10%
formal consistency.

Oral defense Clarity, mastery of the topic, time manage- 10%
ment, quality of presentation material.

Answers to questions Argumentation, autonomy, lucidity regard- 10%
and critical distance ing limitations and perspectives.

Writing and compliance guide
Use this grid as a self-check tool. Before submission, make sure that each criterion
is visible in the report or prepared for the oral defense.

4. Bibliographic references: requirements and good
practices

The bibliography is one of the strongest indicators of the scientific quality of a report.
Any borrowed idea, data, figure, table, code excerpt, formula or method must be
properly attributed. The report should respect the following principles:

xxxvii



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

— use a consistent citation style; the IEEE style is recommended for engineering
programs;

— ensure that every source cited in the text appears in the bibliography and vice
versa;

— prioritize indexed journal papers, recognized conference proceedings, academic
books, standards, patents and reliable technical reports;

— target at least 25 references for a master/engineering degree level report, with
≥ 60% indexed scientific sources whenever applicable;

— avoid Wikipedia, non-specialized blogs, unverifiable commercial content and
websites without clearly identifiable authorship;

— add an access date for web resources.

4.1 How to cite in the text

In IEEE style, citations appear in numbered brackets such as [1], [2] or [3], [4].
The citation should appear as close as possible to the corresponding idea. A paraphrase
must be cited just like a direct quotation.

Example: Recent work shows that system robustness strongly depends on
training-data quality and on the validation protocol [1].
Example: The selected architecture is consistent with practices described in
technical literature [2, 3].

4.2 Examples of IEEE references

— Journal article: [1] A. Author and B. Author, « Article title, » Journal name,
vol. X, no. Y, pp. xx–yy, year.

— Conference paper: [2] A. Author, « Paper title, » in Proc. Conference name,
city, country, year, pp. xx–yy.

— Book: [3] A. Author, Book title, Xth ed. city: publisher, year.
— Standard: [4] Standard title, organization, reference, year.
— Website: [5] Author or organization, « Resource title, » website, year. [Online].

Available: URL. [Accessed: day month year].

xxxviii



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

4.3 How to fill in references.bib

The references.bib file provided with this template allows students to manage their
references properly with BibTeX. The minimum workflow is the following:

1. add a bibliographic entry to references.bib;
2. cite the source in the text using \cite{key};
3. compile the project with the standard Overleaf sequence;
4. verify that all references are correct, complete and homogeneous.

4.4 BibTeX examples to copy and adapt

@article { myPaper2025 ,

author = {A. Author and B. Author },

title = { Article title},

journal = { Journal name},

volume = {12} ,

number = {3},

pages = {101 - -115} ,

year = {2025}

}

@inproceedings {myConf2024 ,

author = {A. Author and B. Author },

title = {Paper title},

booktitle = { Proceedings of ...} ,

pages = {55 - -60} ,

year = {2024}

}

@book{myBook2023 ,

author = {A. Author },

title = {Book title},

publisher = { Publisher },

year = {2023}

xxxix



List of Tables ESPRIM – Final Project Report

}

@misc{myWeb2026 ,

author = {{ Organization name }},

title = {Web resource title},

year = {2026} ,

url = {https :// example .org},

note = {[ Online ]. Accessed : 15 April 2026}

}

Writing and compliance guide
A long bibliography does not automatically improve report quality. Juries value
a selection that is relevant, reasonably recent, scientifically credible and actually
used in the analysis.

5. How to use this template pedagogically

It is recommended that students read this section before starting to write, then come
back to it at three key moments:

— at the beginning, to understand the academic purpose of the internship/project;
— midway through, to check the alignment between objectives, chapters and pro-

duced evidence;
— before submission, to verify the report’s compliance with institutional expecta-

tions.

Writing and compliance guide
Practical suggestion for supervisors: keep this section in the working version shared
with the student, then hide it in the final submission version. The template then
serves a dual purpose: report model and reading support for the final-year
project framework.

xl



General introduction

The aviation industry is categorised among the sectors that require reliability so much,
because if the avionics system (the electronic pieces used in aircraft) fails unexpectedly,
it will cause operational disruptions that demand costly maintenance interventions, and
in critical cases, it can affect safety.
Modern aircraft continuously generate large volumes of data across multiple systems,
such as electronic, thermal and communication subsystems.
There are three types of maintenance. The first is reactive maintenance, where mainte-
nance is required after disruptions occur. This is not perfect anymore for the aviation
field. The second type is preventive maintenance, which consists of controlling what
must be controlled under a strict timetable. This is not always efficient because it can
lead to unnecessary part replacements and that is a loss of money. The third type is
predictive maintenance, which is based on past data. We forecast disruptions before
catastrophic failure occurs.
Our solution touches this challenge. Leveraging the massive quantity of operational
time-series data generated requires intelligent and automatic software solutions. So we
propose the conception and development of an intelligent avionics health monitoring
and predictive maintenance system. This system helps users detect anomalies during
data streams, using different methods such as threshold-based detection and Isolation
Forest (an AI model that will operate on generated data).
This report is organised as follows. Chapter 2 presents the state of the art. Chapter 3
describes the requirements analysis and methodology. Chapter 4 covers the design and
architecture. Chapter 5 presents the implementation. Chapter 6 discusses testing, val-
idation, and results. Finally, the general conclusion summarises the work and outlines
future perspectives.

1



CHAPTER 1

Company Presentation: AVIONAV

[To complete: This chapter will be written after completing core chapters.]

2



CHAPTER 2

State of the art and project
positioning

Introduction to Chapter 2

This chapter presents the scientific and technical background necessary to understand
the project. It then reviews existing UAV motor maintenance methods and their lim-
itations. Finally, it positions the proposed project by explaining the focus on bearing
wear and the use of machine learning for predictive maintenance.

2.1 Scientific and technical context

Avionics is a term that merges two words: electronics and aviation. So avionics systems
are the electronic systems used in aircraft that are used in many operations, such
as navigation, communication, flight control, monitoring and safety. As examples,
we mention: radar systems, flight control systems, communication systems, autopilot
systems, detecting system, and safety control systems.
We need to monitor them for many reasons, including reducing downtime, supporting
predictive maintenance, detecting abnormal cases before unexpected failure occurs,
guaranteeing safety, and avoiding costly maintenance interventions.
This project aims to monitor avionics-related parameters such as voltage levels, current
measurements, temperature degrees, error rate counters, and communication frequency.

3



Chapter 2. State of the art and project positioning ESPRIM – Final Project Report

2.2 Critical analysis of existing work

Nowadays, UAV motor maintenance is mostly reactive or scheduled, and is done
through manual monitoring, routine inspections, and replacing components after a
failure appears. Maintenance methods vary depending on the UAV type, whether it is
military, civilian, or used for photography.

Current maintenance methods

1. Lubricating bearings: Bearings are among the most failure-prone parts. Tech-
nicians regularly lubricate them to reduce friction. If abnormal noise appears,
technicians replace the bearings completely.

2. Cleaning the motor: UAV motors are frequently exposed to dust, moisture,
sand, and insects, especially after flying in desert or agricultural environments.
Therefore, technicians and users clean them using compressed air, small brushes,
and electronic cleaning alcohol.

3. Monitoring temperature: Operators sometimes measure the temperature of
components including the motor, propeller, ESC, and wires. Since the more
current the motor consumes, the more its temperature rises (according to Ploss
= I2 × R), technicians also monitor current consumption. High temperature may
indicate heavy loads, because drone motors are small and lightweight, making
them unable to carry heavy cameras or fly in hot environments for long durations.

4. Routine visual inspection: Technicians and operators regularly inspect com-
ponents to check for issues such as propeller cracks, damaged magnets, internal
mechanical issues, and loose screws. They also look for sand, dust, or dirt, espe-
cially after flying in desert or agricultural environments.

5. Testing vibrations and sound: Operators, technicians, and users monitor for
abnormal sounds or vibrations, then process them to identify the source. This
may indicate issues such as bearing wear. This method depends heavily on the
technician’s or operator’s experience.

6. Replacing the motor after a problem appears: In many cases, maintenance
is reactive. The motor is completely replaced after it gets damaged. Often, the

4



Chapter 2. State of the art and project positioning ESPRIM – Final Project Report

entire motor is discarded instead of repairing only the damaged part, especially
in professional or industrial drones where the cost of repair may exceed the cost
of replacement.

7. Using flight data (in advanced systems): Some modern UAVs record infor-
mation such as flight hours, RPM, current consumption, and error logs. Compa-
nies such as DJI and Parrot use this data to determine maintenance timing.

Weaknesses of current methods

The traditional methods listed above have several weaknesses:

— Maintenance is mostly reactive or scheduled, not predictive. Reactive
maintenance means the motor is replaced only after failure. This is hazardous
because the drone can crash during flight, leading to financial losses. Scheduled
maintenance means replacing the motor after a specific number of flight hours.
This is also a financial loss because the motor may be replaced unnecessarily.
Therefore, maintenance should be predictive.

— Heavy dependence on humans. From the traditional methods, we can con-
clude that maintenance depends completely on human observation and experi-
ence. This can lead to differences in diagnostic accuracy.

— Continuous vibrations can lead to loose screws, reduced motor lifespan, and
structural fatigue.

— The motor is replaced completely after failure instead of repairing only
the damaged part. This creates electronic waste and results in unsustainable
maintenance practices.

— Excessive heat reduces motor efficiency and can cause damage.
— Current methods cannot detect early degradation. Issues such as bearing

wear, increased friction, and rising current are not noticed until the motor fails
or overheats.

The main weakness of current methods is that they cannot detect early degradation.
Bearing wear, increased friction, and rising current are not noticed until the motor fails
or overheats. This is why predictive maintenance using AI is needed.

5



Chapter 2. State of the art and project positioning ESPRIM – Final Project Report

Current direction in UAV motor maintenance

The field is currently moving toward:

— Predictive maintenance using AI
— Automated vibration analysis
— Real-time temperature monitoring
— Failure detection before breakdown
— Digital twin technology
— Cloud-based flight data analysis

These current directions aim to prevent drone crashes and reduce maintenance costs
by predicting motor failure before it happens. This is considered one of the most
important current research areas in UAV systems.

2.3 Project positioning

This project focuses on an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) – a fixed-wing drone. The
most critical component of a fixed-wing drone is the propulsion system (brushless DC
motor and electronic speed controller (ESC)), because the drone crashes if the motor
fails.
A brushless motor can fail in different ways:

— A broken propeller blade – causes massive, immediate vibration.
— A burnt ESC MOSFET – the motor stops instantly after losing power.
— A disconnected wire phase – the motor stutters and will not spin.
— Demagnetised rotor magnets – happens if the motor gets too hot and loses torque.
— Bearing wear – mechanical friction increases gradually over time.

We chose to focus on bearing wear because it is a progressive mechanical failure. The
other failures (broken propeller, burnt ESC, disconnected wire) are instantaneous. If
a wire disconnects or the ESC blows up, the drone crashes immediately. We cannot
predict a wire snapping – that requires reactive maintenance (fixing after it breaks).
If a propeller chips during flight, the vibration is instantaneous and obvious.

6



Chapter 2. State of the art and project positioning ESPRIM – Final Project Report

Bearing wear is different. It happens slowly. The bearings take hours or days to lose
lubrication, become scratched, and increase friction. This slow, creeping mechanical
failure generates time-series data – a slowly rising current and a slowly rising tem-
perature. This gradual deterioration is exactly the type of time-series anomaly that
predictive maintenance AI is designed to detect before a catastrophic failure occurs.
Machine learning algorithms, including Isolation Forest, are built to detect exactly this
kind of gradual drift.
The motor continuously generates current and heat. When bearings wear out, me-
chanical friction increases. To overcome this friction and maintain a cruise speed of
5000 RPM (revolutions per minute), we must supply more electrical current to the
motor. According to thermal dynamics, electrical heat generation in the stator coils is
proportional to the square of the current (Ploss = I2 × R). Therefore, the temperature
rises exponentially.
These precursors – increased electrical current, rising temperature, and vibrations –
allow us to detect motor degradation before a critical failure occurs. Therefore, the
best choice is to monitor current and temperature.
My initial technical specification proposed monitoring five parameters. However, after
discussion with my industrial supervisor, I focused on the UAV propulsion system. The
motor is the most critical component. I monitor current and temperature to detect
gradual degradation (bearing wear).

Conclusion to Chapter 2

This chapter has presented the scientific background of avionics monitoring and UAV
motor maintenance. It has reviewed existing maintenance methods, including visual
inspections, temperature monitoring, vibration testing, and flight data recording. The
analysis revealed that current methods are mostly reactive or scheduled, heavily de-
pendent on human experience, and unable to detect early degradation such as bearing
wear. The chapter then positioned the proposed project, explaining why bearing wear
was chosen as the focus and how monitoring current and temperature enables early
anomaly detection using machine learning. The next chapter will present the require-
ments analysis and Scrum methodology.

7



CHAPTER 3

Requirements Analysis and Scrum
Methodology

Introduction to Chapter 3

This chapter presents the requirements analysis and the Scrum methodology adopted
for the project. It first identifies the three actors who will interact with the platform:
the Administrator, the Maintenance Engineer, and the Drone Operator. It then de-
scribes their needs, followed by the functional and non-functional requirements. The
chapter also defines the Scrum roles, presents the product backlog (epics and user
stories), and concludes with the sprint planning for the four sprints.

3.1 Actors Identification

The following table presents the three actors of the system:

8



Chapter 3. Requirements Analysis and Scrum MethodologyESPRIM – Final Project Report

Table 3.1 – Actors of the system

Actor Description What they need to do
Administrator Person who manages Create user accounts, disable user

the platform and user accounts, view all system activity,
accounts configure settings

Maintenance Person who fixes the View telemetry graphs, see AI
Engineer drone and analyzes anomaly detection results, check

health data historical flights, read anomaly
explanations, plan repairs

Drone Opera- Person who flies the Monitor motor temperature and
tor drone current during flight, receive real-

time alerts, land safely if a prob-
lem is detected, inform the main-
tenance engineer of sudden fail-
ures

3.2 Needs Analysis

3.2.1 Administrator Needs

The Administrator needs to manage user accounts. When a new Maintenance Engineer
or Drone Operator joins AVIONAV, the Administrator must be able to create an
account for them. When someone leaves the company, the Administrator must be able
to disable their account. The Administrator also needs to view system activity and
configure platform settings.

3.2.2 Maintenance Engineer Needs

The Maintenance Engineer needs to monitor the health of the UAV motor. They need
to view real-time and historical telemetry graphs (current and temperature). They
need to see when the AI detects an anomaly and understand why the anomaly was
detected (explainability). They need to plan maintenance actions (such as bearing

9



Chapter 3. Requirements Analysis and Scrum MethodologyESPRIM – Final Project Report

replacement) based on the AI predictions.

3.2.3 Drone Operator Needs

The Drone Operator needs to receive real-time alerts during flight. They need to know
if the motor is becoming too hot or pulling too much current. They need to land the
drone safely if an alert is triggered. If a sudden failure occurs (like a wire snapping),
they need to inform the Maintenance Engineer.

3.3 Functional and Non-Functional Requirements

10



Chapter 3. Requirements Analysis and Scrum MethodologyESPRIM – Final Project Report

3.3.1 Functional Requirements

Table 3.2 – Functional requirements

ID Requirement
FR-01 The system shall allow users to log in with an email and

password.
FR-02 The system shall allow the Administrator to create,

view, and disable user accounts.
FR-03 The system shall generate simulated telemetry data for

motor current (Amps) and motor temperature (°C).
FR-04 The system shall store telemetry data in a database

(SQLite).
FR-05 The system shall train an Isolation Forest machine learn-

ing model on healthy flight data.
FR-06 The system shall detect anomalies in real-time telemetry

streams using the trained model.
FR-07 The system shall display current and temperature

graphs on a dashboard.
FR-08 The system shall send an alert when an anomaly is de-

tected.
FR-09 The system shall provide an explanation of why an

anomaly was detected.
FR-10 The system shall allow the Maintenance Engineer to

view historical flight data.
FR-11 The system shall distinguish between three user roles

(Administrator, Maintenance Engineer, Drone Opera-
tor).

FR-12 The system shall allow the Drone Operator to view only
alerts and basic status (not full telemetry history).

11



Chapter 3. Requirements Analysis and Scrum MethodologyESPRIM – Final Project Report

3.3.2 Non-Functional Requirements

Table 3.3 – Non-functional requirements

ID Requirement
NFR-01 The system shall respond to user actions within 2 sec-

onds.
NFR-02 The system shall require authentication for all pages ex-

cept the login page.
NFR-03 The system shall be accessible via a web browser

(Chrome, Firefox, Edge).
NFR-04 The system shall run on a standard laptop without spe-

cial hardware.
NFR-05 The system shall store data persistently using SQLite so

that data survives restarts.
NFR-06 The system shall minimize false negatives (missing a real

failure) to ensure drone safety.

3.4 Scrum Roles

In accordance with the Scrum framework, the project is structured around three main
roles:

— Product Owner: Assured by the Academic Supervisor. Responsible for defin-
ing the project needs, validating the functional increments, and prioritizing the
objectives.

— Scrum Master: Assured by the student (Mootez Bourguiba). Responsible
for organizing the work, applying Scrum principles, and ensuring the smooth
execution of Sprints.

— Development Team: Assured by the student (Mootez Bourguiba). Responsible
for the technical conception, Python development, AI training, and testing of the
platform.

12



Chapter 3. Requirements Analysis and Scrum MethodologyESPRIM – Final Project Report

3.5 Product Backlog: Epics and User Stories

3.5.1 Defined Epics

Table 3.4 – Epics of the project

Epic ID Description Associated
Sprint

Epic 1 User Authentication and Role Management Sprint 0
Epic 2 Telemetry Simulation and Data Pipeline Sprint 1
Epic 3 Anomaly Detection AI Engine (Isolation For- Sprint 2

est)
Epic 4 Dashboard, Alerts, and Explainability Sprint 3

13



Chapter 3. Requirements Analysis and Scrum MethodologyESPRIM – Final Project Report

3.5.2 User Stories

Table 3.5 – Product backlog user stories

ID Epic User Story Priority
US- Epic 1 As a user, I want to log in with my High
01 email and password so that I can access

the platform.
US- Epic 1 As an Administrator, I want to create High
02 new user accounts for Maintenance En-

gineers and Drone Operators.
US- Epic 1 As an Administrator, I want to dis- High
03 able user accounts when someone leaves

AVIONAV.
US- Epic 2 As a Maintenance Engineer, I want the High
04 system to simulate motor current and

temperature data for healthy and de-
grading flights.

US- Epic 2 As a Maintenance Engineer, I want High
05 the telemetry data to be saved in a

database so that I can review past
flights.

US- Epic 3 As a Maintenance Engineer, I want the High
06 Isolation Forest model to be trained on

healthy flight data only.
US- Epic 3 As a Maintenance Engineer, I want the High
07 system to detect anomalies (gradual

current and temperature drift) on new
flight data.

US- Epic 3 As a Maintenance Engineer, I want the Medium
08 system to calculate the early warning

time.
US- Epic 4 As a Drone Operator, I want to see High
09 real-time motor current and tempera-

ture graphs1d4uring flight.
US- Epic 4 As a Drone Operator, I want to receive High
10 an alert when the AI detects a motor

anomaly.
US- Epic 4 As a Maintenance Engineer, I want to Medium
11 see an explanation of why an anomaly

was detected.
US- Epic 4 As a Maintenance Engineer, I want to Medium
12 view historical telemetry data for past

flights.
US- Epic 4 As a Drone Operator, I want to see a Low
13 simple health status (OK / WARNING

/ CRITICAL).



Chapter 3. Requirements Analysis and Scrum MethodologyESPRIM – Final Project Report

3.6 Sprint Planning

The project timeline is divided into four Sprints:

Table 3.6 – Sprint planning

Sprint Duration Objective / Deliverable
Sprint 0 Weeks 1–2 Initialization: Actors identification, require-

ments, product backlog, system architecture,
database schema

Sprint 1 Weeks 3–5 Telemetry simulation: Python script to gen-
erate motor current and temperature data
(healthy and degrading flights)

Sprint 2 Weeks 6–9 Anomaly detection engine: Train Isolation
Forest model, detect anomalies on Flight 6,
calculate early warning time

Sprint 3 Weeks 10–14 Dashboard and integration: Streamlit dash-
board, real-time graphs, alerts, explainabil-
ity, authentication, role management

Conclusion to Chapter 3

This chapter has presented the requirements analysis for the Intelligent Avionics Health
Monitoring Platform. Three actors were identified: Administrator, Maintenance En-
gineer, and Drone Operator. Their needs were analyzed, and functional and non-
functional requirements were defined. The Scrum roles were assigned, and the product
backlog was presented through epics and user stories. Finally, the sprint planning was
established, dividing the project into four sprints: initialization, telemetry simulation,
anomaly detection, and dashboard integration. The next chapter will present Sprint
0: Initialization and Architecture.

15



General conclusion and perspectives

Writing and compliance guide
The conclusion must explicitly answer the objectives announced in the introduc-
tion. Do not introduce new results. End with coherent, realistic and well-argued
perspectives.

This project addressed the problem related to [To complete: recall the topic].
The work carried out led to [To complete: summarize the main results and
contributions]. The objectives achieved include in particular [To complete: list the
main outcomes], while some limitations remain, especially [To complete: indicate
the technical, methodological or organizational limits].
From both an academic and professional perspective, this work highlights [To com-
plete: the mobilized competencies: analysis, design, validation, critical
thinking, autonomy]. The future perspectives concern [To complete: future
improvements, scope extension, industrialization, scale-up, new datasets,
on-site validation, etc.].

16



Bibliography

[1] A. Example and B. Example, “An example of engineering journal article citation,”
International Journal of Engineering Examples, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 101–115, 2024.

[2] C. Example and D. Example, “An example of conference paper citation,” in Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Applied Engineering, 2023, pp. 55–60.

[3] International Organization for Standardization, “Example standard for technical
documentation,” 2022, iSO Example 12345:2022.

17



CHAPTER A

Recommended traceability tables

Writing and compliance guide
This appendix provides recommended structures to strengthen report coherence.
Students may integrate all or part of them in the main body if it improves read-
ability.

A.1 Requirements Traceability Matrix

Requirement Design choice Implemented Validation Status
element method

EX-01 [To complete: [To complete: [To complete: Validated
...] ...] ...]

EX-02 [To complete: [To complete: [To complete: In progress
...] ...] ...]

A.2 Concept Comparison Matrix

Criterion Idea 1 Idea 2 Idea 3 Comment / fi-
nal choice

18



Bibliography ESPRIM – Final Project Report

Performance 3 2 1 [To complete:
...]

Cost 2 3 1 [To complete:
...]

Risk 2 2 3 [To complete:
...]

A.3 Validation Summary Table

Test Objective Indicator Expected Obtained Conclusion

T1 [To complete: [To com- [To com- [To com- OK
...] plete: ...] plete: ...] plete: ...]

T2 [To complete: [To com- [To com- [To com- KO
...] plete: ...] plete: ...] plete: ...]

19



CHAPTER B

Scientific integrity, generative AI
and reproducibility

B.1 Declaration of generative AI usage

Writing and compliance guide
The use of AI tools to rephrase text, generate code, create figures, suggest outlines
or summarize resources must be explicitly declared. The student remains fully
responsible for the accuracy of the content and compliance with citation rules.

Generative AI tools (ChatGPT) were used in this project for the following
purposes:

— To suggest the overall report structure and section organization
— To rephrase and improve clarity of certain technical sentences
— To provide code examples and debug syntax for FastAPI and React

components
— To help format LaTeX tables and BibTeX entries

All technical implementation (data simulation, anomaly detection algorithms,
API development, dashboard creation), all testing and validation, and all
final content verification were performed by the author. The author assumes
full scientific and academic responsibility for the final work.

20



Appendix B. Scientific integrity, generative AI and reproduEcSibPilRitIyM – Final Project Report

B.2 Minimum reproducibility expectations

— Datasets: source, size, date, acquisition mode, restrictions.
— Tools: software versions, libraries, hardware environment, system configuration.
— Critical parameters: hyperparameters, thresholds, frequencies, dimensions, pro-

tocols.
— Validation elements: scripts, test notebooks, configuration captures, schematics,

bills of materials.
— Confidentiality: distinguish what is shareable, masked or anonymized.

B.3 Compliance reminders

— ✓ Every borrowed figure, table, code excerpt or idea must be attributed.
— ✓ Results must be interpreted critically.
— ● An excessively high similarity rate may compromise report acceptability.
— ● Fluent text is not scientific evidence if it is not linked to a method and

verifiable results.

21



CHAPTER C

Final checklist before submission

C.1 Structure and coherence

— ✓ Front matter is complete.
— ✓ The introduction announces the problem statement, objectives and plan.
— ✓ Each chapter has a clear internal logic.
— ✓ The conclusion explicitly answers the objectives.

C.2 Scientific quality

— ✓ Choices are justified and compared.
— ✓ Results are validated through an explicit protocol.
— ✓ Limitations and threats to validity are discussed.
— ✓ The report contains at least 25 references, with a majority of indexed scientific

sources.

C.3 Form and integrity

— ✓ Figures and tables are numbered and cited in the text.
— ✓ SI units are respected.
— ✓ The bibliography follows a homogeneous style (IEEE recommended).

22



Appendix C. Final checklist before submission ESPRIM – Final Project Report

— ✓ The target similarity rate remains < 15%.
— ✓ Generative AI usage is declared if applicable.

C.4 Files to submit

— Final PDF of the report.
— LaTeX source files (if required by the program).
— Similarity report.
— Oral defense slides.
— Technical appendices or complementary deliverables if required.

23