My supervisor:  “Good morning, Mootez, I have just found time to take a look at your  2 
PDFs that you sent. 

As for the code, if you send me the code, what will I do with it? Normally, you use the code 
and prepare a demonstration that I can see.  

I will not talk about the code now. I will talk about something wrong in the documents that 
you sent. I will be serious, and I’ll try to soften the phrases, but really, I feel very anxious if I 
find a student at the 3D level who normally has acquired knowledge and skills, but is 
working on a PFE without taking advantage of the opportunity, and is counting on the AI 
agent 100% in generating his documents. It means that the 2 documents you sent, I don’t 
need to put them on a controller to check whether they are 100% generated with AI or not, 
it’s an obvious case. 

I don’t have a problem with the AI and generating documents with AI if the student helps 
themselves with AI. But if he counts on the AI 100%, we don’t need to give you the final year 
projects to you to work on them; we can address ChatGPT to work on the PFE for you, and in 
this case, we don’t have any evaluation criteria at that time.  On the defence day, when you 
stand in front of the jury, we will not hold any AI assistant accountable for the work that he 
did for you and the documentation he wrote for you, because that is illogical. 

Really, I have been thinking all morning, not even from the morning from yesterday, I have 
been thinking what I will say to you. So I decided to say that I got mad at you. Because we 
are today, 01/05/2026, I received from you a document that you did not write in them any 
word by yourself and generated with AI, and you didn’t even try to hide that.  

I can detect from the first look I can detect whether the document is generated with AI or not. 
It’s a final year project, it isn’t a module project or a subject project, so there is no reason to 
think of using AI, because time is enough for you in this period, because it’s dedicated only 
to your PFE.  

The AI generated an empty document for you. It’s illogical that a PFE report contains only 24 
pages. I’m supervising people from another university that they didnn’t complete their 
project, and they exceeded 100 pages. 

Let’s not talk about the number of the page; let’s talk about the content of the document, 
which is empty. Why that? Because IA don’t give you all the details,  and if you don’t deal 
with him well, he will not elevate your level of details, so the output will be the report you 
sent.  

I wonder if you master every point in the technical specifications and the report, regardless of 
the fact of counting on yourself. Suppose that I neglected that, although I can’t do that 
because there is nothing, when you stand in front of the jury, do you know what you will talk 
to them? Did you understand the criteria that he gave you and the types of anomalies he gave 
you, and did you understand the parameters he gave you and their impact on the drone 
avionics, and did you understand their logical representation?  



In your PFE, you are talking about an Intelligent Avionics Health Monitoring and Predictive 
Maintenance Platform. We understood that the monitoring would be done with detectors that 
would send you values of temperature, voltage and current. But where is the prediction that 
you talked about in the title of the project,” Intelligent Avionics Health Monitoring and 
Predictive Maintenance Platform”? There is nothing. 

I wonder if you understood the 3 anomaly types he proposed. If yes, you can proceed to the 
next step, which is optimising and updating them depending on your understanding. And if 
not, you ask him to explain for you to know what to say to the jury. Because on the defence 
day, we will not talk to any AI assistant, we will ask you and hold you accountable for the 
function that AI did to you, which I’m sure that you did not understand how it works. 

Really, it’s heart-wrenching!  

I’m not talking only about you because all people use AI. But some people exploit AI in their 
favour and understand what they do, and some people don’t understand to the point that they 
don’t know how to exploit an AI agent.  

The objective is not that he did the work for you, even if you reached the point where you 
can’t write code manually in a PFE. That is a project that students must work hard on to learn 
many technical and soft skills. 

It's unfortunate that you count on the AI in all issues, including reports, presentations, and all 
deliverables and on the defence day, you present a work that you didn’t influence by even 
1%.   

I didn’t find what to correct. There is nothing. There is no harmony, no continuity. It seems 
that you didn’t open the email of Mr Abdelkarim Mars that contained the home page of the 
report and guide with all the details, because at least there is 40% or 50% of the content of the 
guide about the structure of the report doesn’t match your report.  

Because you didn’t give the guide to the AI assistant to follow when you asked him to work 
for you, and you didn’t tell him that your report must follow the guide.  

The guide contains the steps and parts that should be included in the report.  

The redaction should be rich; it’s illogical that a chapter contains only one page. The chapter 
1 introduction and system context should not be composed of only 1 page. 

Really, I’m talking to you seriously, because it’s the first time that I find myself in a situation 
like that.  

The chapter should contain an introduction and a conclusion. There is no report structure. I 
don’t have the willingness to read the report because I know that the content of the report 
isn’t written by you, it isn’t your production, and it isn’t your vision. Should I evaluate the 
vision of the AI assistant? 



 You didn’t give AI the technical details, the AI don’t have the complete vision of your 
project. He doesn’t know what you want to do. And you didn’t tell him what is required of 
you.   

You did not give him the information, so he will give you an incomplete, invalid, and 
shallow. So nothing allows me to open the document, read it, evaluate it and correct it, neither 
my Professional conscience nor my convictions.  

It's bad, I tried so much not to hurt you with any word, and like that, I think that I didn’t 
exceed my limits.  

Because really bad that we deal with a PFE with this negativity,  laziness, and dependence on 
IA. It’s painful! It’s heart-wrenching.  

Independent of the politics, circumstances and approach of ESPRIM, I won’t talk about it. 

If you want that we carry on working on this project, I have to see your impact, your efforts, 
your touch and your production. 

As for the code, I don’t care if it is written by you or AI. But you have to be able to exploit 
the work that he will do AI for you. 

Nowadays, nobody can prevent you from using AI, but at least you have to master how to 
guide the AI assistant because by himself, he doesn’t know how to work correctly the project 
from A to Z. 

So you have to guide it by asking him to do a particular thing, then he will give you block A 
and block B, and you have to link block A with block B, and then when he gives you block C, 
you have to know how to link C to A and B together, to finally obtain a functional and 
coherent product that it don’t present any breakup between blocks. 

You have to be able to connect a product to another product to appear coherent, harmonious 
and harmonic, and then I can believe that you did an effort and you understand what he gave 
you to connect it with what he gave you before. 

A student must know how to connect one idea to another idea and use AI correctly and 
wisely, not stupidly. 

So, I can’t correct this report because its content isn’t complete. I will talk about things 
inexistent whether about the form or the content of chapters. 

First thing, open the guide and read it carefully, and understand what they ask you to do. 

Then you compare the demand to your deliverables. Then, we can talk about the content, 
whether it’s done by you or someone else. 

It’s really painful. 

You said that you will develop a web platform, and you talked about 2 actors, which are the 
drone operator and the maintenance engineer. But then you didn’t talk about authentication. 
In fact, you have to tell the AI that you need access to the platform by identifying roles, as it 



is clear in the report that there is no authentication in the functional requirements, and even in 
the user stories, there is no authentication. 

So your system can’t be able to differentiate between the user who is an engineer and the user 
who is a drone operator.  

To differentiate between the engineer and the drone operator, there is 2 solutions:  

Solution 1: For each user, you have to develop a specific platform and to link the two 
platforms.  

 

By the way, there is another issue you didn’t talk about: the database. 

There is no web application without a database. 

I saw that you are talking about a CSV file, and the data can’t be saved in a CSV file.  

The platform should have an administrator, but your platform hasn’t. If the platform doesn’t 
have an administrator, it can’t be parameterised. For example, if an engineer were working in 
our society and he left the society, he shouldn’t be allowed to access our platform again 
because he can work with other competitors after leaving our society. So the platform must 
have an administrator who will be able to manage user accounts. But you didn’t even talk 
about user accounts. You didn’t even say that access to user accounts should be with 
coordinates. No distributed web application can be accessed without accounts nowadays.  
How will the application know who the user is connected to?  

You are talking about a dashboard and the access to it, but how will the application know 
whether the connected user is an engineer or a drone operator? 

If you are talking about the same actor, you have to call them always with the same name, 
because if not, the person who will read the report will think that you are talking about 
another actor. 

But you named one of your actors an engineer once, and a maintenance engineer once, and 
that can impress the reader that there is 2 actors, one named an engineer and the other named 
a maintenance engineer, so you must name him in each context as an engineer or name him in 
each context as a maintenance engineer.  

So there is no fluidity, no synchronisation, no idea thread that I can follow to understand what 
you are doing or the AI that generated this document for you, what it wants to say.  

There is no logic that you can follow.  

It’s really grave! 

You also didn’t have a correct nomination for the product backlog, user stories and epics. The 
product backlog is an object that is composed of user stories and every user story is affected 
to an epic. 



Normally, 2.3.2 is your product backlog, which contains epics, user stories and 
priorities…etc. 

I can’t blame IA because he works with the medium board that he learned to work with. 

But that doesn’t mean that everything he is doing is correct. 

There are a lot of missing parts. There are a lot of illogical things. There is a lot of fluidity 
lacking. It lacks a lot of coordination with ideas. There are a lot of ideas that aren’t linked 
with each other. There are a lot of differences between the ideas in the technical 
specifications and the report.  

The sprint planning is after the product backlog in your report, and that isn’t correct.  

There is sincerely nothing. 

I tried to follow, but I couldn’t. Some things are correct that we can talk about them, but not 
well explained because not you who redacted, but the IA who redacted. 

And  IA is limited to a specific number of words in generating paragraphs. 

So, you don’t understand, the reader of the report will not understand because not you who 
did the redaction, but IA, who did that, and nobody will understand what IA is talking about, 
and you who asked him to generate this content.  

So if you have the desire to correct, you are not young, and you are the owner of the decision, 
not me, because you are of legal age and vaccinated, and I just gave you my remarks. Really, 
I didn’t expect that from you. Because I saw you wanting me to see your deliverables, read 
them and give you feedback, I thought that I had oriented you to the correct path after 
meeting you 3 times. I expected that you would make an effort.  It’s acceptable to do wrong 
things.  But don’t say  “it’s my work and tell me what to do” if you send me something from 
AI 100% because not you who is doing things, and in that case, it’s better to give me the 
conversation between you and the IA and let me tell him to say to you what you should do.  

It’s really grave, so I suggest that you, if you really want to improve the conditions a little bit, 
because I can’t imagine that conditions will change a lot, either from now to July, or from 
now to September.  

First thing, take a look at the guide, and see which parts should exist in your work.  

Second thing, the guide is written in general;  it doesn’t follow a specific methodology. So the 
methodology that you want to implement, which is Agile Scrum,  obliges you to write one or 
two introductory chapters like IA proposed, because here, among the correct things that IA 
proposes, which you use, the 2 first two chapters are titled correctly, even for the other 
chapters, their distribution is correct, and their titles are correct. But their contents are 
shallow and lack a lot of things.  

Why is their content not complete? Because, as I told you, IA is limited to a specific quantity 
of information that it will generate for you, and it isn’t capable of linking logically with ideas 
that are outside the part that it is generating.  



Linking ideas is a skill that IAs haven’t mastered yet. 

And that is clear to us as supervisors without making any effort. 

I don’t know which level you reached, I don’t know which point you attended, or which 
realisation you did. But, in the report, some parts must be included, clear and done by you, 
not another person, not a problem if someone else assists you or helps you, but redacting for 
you 100% isn’t acceptable.  

That isn’t acceptable because in that case, you can’t say that the deliverables are worked on 
by you, and the errors will appear and will be blatant, as in your report, the mistakes are too 
grave.  

So take a look at the guide, look at what is required from you, take a look at your report and 
compare it to the guide. That’s the first thing. 

The second thing is to read the report before sending it to me to correct it, to check whether 
you understand its content or not, and to be able to answer me in the next meeting if I ask you 
about something.   

Because I shouldn’t correct something that isn't correctable, which isn’t generated well with 
AI. 

Or me, who will be assigned to work on the project instead of him, which isn’t the mission of 
the pedagogic supervisor. 

So, I expect that you hear these vocal messages, I’ll see your reaction, and I’ll wish that we 
can correct, no matter when you are planning to present your project, I wish that you change 
your behaviour, and that you decide to work manually. 

It doesn’t matter to what extent you will work by yourself, either by 20%, or 40% or 80% or 
100%, that’s your choice.  

With the condition that even if you resort to someone to help you, whether he is a human or a 
machine, you know how to implement the output that he’ll give you, you know how to place 
it in the principal context of your project, and you know how to install it, to obtain at the end 
a complete puzzle piece which isn’t sampled, isn’t decomposed, isn’t full of holes, isn’t full 
of incoherence, and isn’t full of problems.” 

Me: “Hello Mr, I don’t know from what I will start. First, I want to tell you that I’m engaged 
not only on the PFE, but I’m also engaged with an international organisation called AIESEC, 
and the last time I was engaged with it was because I had a national conference that lasted 4 
days.  

For my project and my report, I want to tell you that I really understand the first part of the 
report and the step of researching via YouTube to understand the electrical and mechanical 
functioning of the drone.  

Because I wrote the transcript of the YouTube videos manually, and I read them loudly, even 
the same thing for the first part of the report that I showed you at the last physical meeting we 



did. So, I’ll assert for you that I understood them, even if I forgot some information about 
them because of the long period of time, but I made a big effort to understand them. 

But I didn’t implement anything from what I learned through YouTube videos and all the 
research tools. I was unable to synchronise, which means to research, work and redact the 
report at the same time. And I wasn’t able to distinguish between what I should add to the 
report and what I shouldn’t. 

I want to be honest, I won’t tell you a lie, my report is really generated 100% with AI, but as I 
told you, the first part of the report is clear to me, and I understood it well. 

But the other part of the report, I read it, but I didn’t give myself time to write it manually, as 
the first part, because I didn’t send you any deliverables, and I didn’t meet you or call you for 
a long time.   

And I didn’t hear about the guide of Mr Abdelkarim because I didn’t connect to Outlook for a 
long time from the beginning. I heard about it only now. But I’ll ensure that if I had heard 
about it from the beginning, the report would be better than this version. Me also unsatisfied 
with the deliverables, I also felt that it isn’t completed, and it isn’t coherent. 

I also didn’t accept its length.  

And I felt that my report had many parts. I felt that the content wasn’t harmonious. 

I sent you early because I don’t know which parts are lacking, because I didn’t hear about the 
guide, and I didn’t see any template of an old PFE report, and I don’t know where I can find 
some report templates, so I’ll be unable to guide AI well without having the guide and a PFE 
report template.  

I wanted to tell you that I don’t master prompt engineering, which is a skill which consist on 
knowing how to guide AI well. 

Without having the guide and a PFE report template, I’ll be obliged to resort to IA. 

I gave the IA the technical specifications and the Scrum.pdf, and I developed my platform 
and the AI assistant that I worked with, which is called Google AI Studio. And as long as I 
don’t master prompt engineering well and without the guide, he thought that the report was 
complete, but I felt that it was incomplete.  

I’m ready to restart from scratch, and I’m ready for rewriting the report from the beginning, 
and I’m even ready to rewatch YouTube videos. And I want to apologise to you because I 
made you mad at me, you are right to be mad at me.  

I found the guide, and I opened it, and I found scattered .tex files, and I didn’t find a complete 
report. And I want to ask you if you have an old report template that my report should follow, 
or if their topic is similar to my project topic, or their structure is like the structure that should 
be implemented in my report. If it is possible, can you send me a comparison to compare and 
see which parts my report is missing to add them? And which parts aren’t useful to omit, and 
which parts are good to save them to know from what I start in my report.”  



My supervisor: “Mootez, the scattered files compose a LaTeX project, which is a tool to 
replace Microsoft Word, and it is useful in the redaction of the reports. 

It seems that ESPRIM wants you to use LaTeX to redact your reports. No matter whether you 
have an idea about LaTeX or not, among the scattered files, there is a PDF document that you 
should open to find the details of the template of the report.  

For me, the problem isn’t there, but the problem for me is the fact that I already gave you a 
document of a guide named Scrum.pdf of a project in the first physical meeting we did, 
which is a guide that I took an example of another project to show you all the details of the 
work from A to Z.  

And the details are: how to start the report, identification of the problem, analysis of the 
existing situation, what the problem is that the project is treating, what exists, and what 
people are doing nowadays. 

Before you suggested your solution, did anybody think about the problem that you are 
treating in your PFE? 

You should analyse  the existing situation, which consists of the methods that they are using 
in the monitoring of the avionics health and in the maintenance, what are the advantages and 
the disadvantages of these methods, and whether there are developed applications for the 
same issue that your project is about. 

You should do a study about that, and I told you that since the first meeting. 

After talking about the existing solutions, you criticise them, and you tell what you will do 
and what solution you will propose.  

After that, you should talk about the methodology that you will use. 

If you decide to use the Scrum methodology, you should declare that and give the Scrum 
details, and after that, you start implementing the Scrum methodology. 

With what does the Scrum methodology start? 

The first thing you need to start with is needs analysis, and I also gave you the identification 
of actors and the needs analysis of the project in Scrum.pdf. 

If you give these things to IA to do, he will commit numerous mistakes and you’ll not 
discover them. 

And effectively, since I opened your report, I discovered many mistakes. 

There is no logic, no fluidity, no synchronisation in your document. 

Your document is illegible because it isn’t synchronised and isn’t homogeneous. 

You have to write manually; you don’t have a choice. 

You can ask IA to help you to redact a paragraph or correct and optimise a paragraph that you 
wrote.   



But if you give him the technical specifications that he already wrote for you,  and you ask 
him to redact a report for you. That is not acceptable. 

So, I will repeat, go back to Scrum.pdf, take a look at the guide, and open only the PDF 
document; don’t open the other files. 

Why are there many files? The guide that Mr Abdelkarim sent you is a guide following the 
form of a LaTeX project. 

You have the choice whether to redact your report with LaTeX or Microsoft Word. 

And it seems that you don’t know LaTeX because you didn’t know that the guide is a LaTeX 
project. 

But the most important thing is that the content should be written by you. 

You have to draw your diagrams by yourself. You have to analyse the needs by yourself. 

You have to identify who your actors by yourself. 

You said that you have 2 actors, who are the maintenance engineer and the drone operator, 
and you didn’t say that you have an admin. 

If you have an admin, you have to identify their functional requirements and non-functional 
requirements.  

After that, you need to draw the global use-case diagram.  

You give your product backlog. 

The product backlog doesn’t contain only 4 user stories because the product backlog belongs 
to a web application that doesn’t contain only 4 user stories. 

If you don’t do that by yourself, the AI agent won’t give you. 

You have a use case named authenticate, but you didn’t talk about it because if you have 3 
actors: which are a maintenance engineer, a drone operator and an administrator, who you 
didn’t talk about, and you should add them to your actors, and when the 3 actors have access 
to the application, they will access across an identificatory interface.  

You should add the inscription, update the profile, modifying the password. 

Your product backlog is empty. Have you done a product backlog before? (we haven’t 
already done), That is the problem that you are not focused on professors, not only you, all 
ESPRIM students, but they are also completely demotivated, and that is the cause of the 
situation that you got stuck in, and then you justify that with the fact that it is the first time 
that you write a PFE report, which is a logical statement because that’s the first time that you 
work on a PFE project. 

But, normally, you have been using the tools for 5 years, so you should learn to be able to 
write a PFE report, work on a PFE project and draw your diagrams. 



But you didn’t draw class diagrams, the sequence diagrams aren’t clear,  and the use-case 
diagrams are terrible. 

I didn’t find what to correct.  I can’t correct something not constructed. 

So you have the guide, you have your application, which AI helped you develop. That’s it it’s 
a snowball, you don’t work by yourself your technical part of the project. 

  And the logical thing is that you don’t start with the development, but with conception. 

You should do the functional and non-functional requirements. 

You should identify your actors, and then you should do your product backlog. 

Then you move to the sprint planning, and then in each sprint, you talk about what you did. 

Sprint planning first, then the sprint backlog. 

 Each sprint should hold at least 3 diagram types: functional diagram, static diagram, and 
dynamic diagram.   

And the content should be logical and consistent. 

In your case, there is no content. I haven’t seen anything about the technical part. 

And you are not obliged to send me if you didn’t work. You said that you sent me a message 
because you hadn’t contacted me for a long time. 

I don’t require you to send me an incomplete document because I will do nothing with, did 
you think that I’m satisfied that you sent me a report? 

I’d rather that you don’t send me anything, than you send me something that has no 
relationship with the subject, I can’t correct it, and unreadable. 

Because if you send me a document like this, for me, you disrespect me because I’m 
supervising you, I’m not supervising ChatGPT, or Claude, or another AI assistant. 

As long as I’m supervising you, you have to send me your work, your realisation, your 
redaction, your development and your conception not of AI. 

And as for AI, I want to say, “Your goods have been returned to you”  

If you ask him well, he’ll answer you well. 

If you ask him badly, he’ll answer you badly. 

If you ask him at an average level, he’ll answer you at an average level. 

And AI doesn’t do anything by itself. 

Isn’t logic that you said AI do for me whatever to give you a report, and the proof that he 
gave you an empty report